Come kiss me like it will save me
Like you could shower the world with the brightness captured behind your lips
Like you never felt the rushing wave of affection until you met me
Please allow me the pleasure of raising your hand to the light
For you have already bathed me in your beams
I wish for you to receive the night sky in all its glory
Stars trying to outshine you against the black backdrop of my soul
Come dance with me under the soft moon little frog,
So your heartbeat will slowly sync with mine
And you can finally feel the full force of my undoing
As the moonrays slowly float us higher, until our dance no longer reaches the earth

:)

I have never seen such a smile,
One that rivals the amber sunrise
Or a kaleidoscope of butterflies in a clear blue sky.
My love for you grew slowly
Was planted the first time I sat across from you
Your funky button up and frat boy shorts
Intimidating me from trying to solve your mystery
Sure that someone like you could sense
The abyss I was trying to climb out of
And with your platform Doc Martins,
Kick me back in
But you know what they say about first impressions.
Along came a pink puff ball
Who made sure we didn’t have to wait for the charm of a third time.
This time you were clothed in a black turtleneck and dark jeans
Silver crosses dangling from your soft ears
A look that has been compared to both the infamous E-boys and Steve Jobs.
This day you were so friendly
I assumed you had to be faking it
Mocking me for how pathetic I was
But I quickly learned that your façade is one that protects
A vibrant, compassionate, resilient person
Who has faced hurt and trauma
Just for being who you are.
What followed was a whirlwind four months
In which I learned that you are the kind of person
Who has a stuffed blue whale named Oswald
As your unlicensed therapist and hug giver,
Who makes the best phone calls while watering your beloved plants,
Or rocking sassy sunglasses,
Or making a pb&j sandwich
Because stress makes us miss our childhood.
Someone who looks after a dozen ditzy chickens
Like they are long lost relatives. 
You are such a full person,
Living your life truthfully.
When I first met you
I was incredibly intimidated,
Because I assumed a person so sure,
So passionate, so impactful
Had to be fearless, couldn’t
Suffer the same insecurities and anxieties I do.
But through texts, facetime phone calls,
And frog memes exchanged,
I learned that while you are 
Everything I thought at first glance
You have fears
Thoughts that make you believe you are less
Reinforced by the actions of loud people. 
There is trauma in your past,
And unfortunately in your future.
These things do not stop you
They in fact seem to motivate you
To live life as if it were all good.
You have been forced to stand up for yourself,
Your rights as a human being,
With such force it astounds me.
Not only do you fight for yourself
You fight for those you love
So ferociously.

Now, I jump every time my phone buzzes
Hoping you have graced me with a shred
Of your attention.
Every “I love you” I type
Has a hidden meaning
That can never escape my heart.
Because while I was slowly learning
How to see your forest for the trees
You were learning how to swim
In someone else’s current.
She is the object of your attention
Affection and frogs.
I am blessed just enough to be your friend,
Maybe even awarded a best,
But lover is never a word you will use
To describe me when talking with your sisters.
Being so close to your flame,
Witnessing just how bright it burns when
Romance is used to wax it,
Has caused me to drown.
I learned the stroke of friends
But my heart began to beat a little differently
And my legs started to kick too strongly
I am drowning because I have fallen for you
And I cannot hide it for much longer.

:)

I never thought I would be jealous of a stuffed whale named Oswald
But he is 1,447 miles closer to you than I am
And he gets your hugs and smiles
That blue ball of love can comfort you
While I am forced to rely on texts and intermittent phone calls

And while you send me your “songs to cry to” playlist
She gets your “for her” one
I realized my feelings too late
Fell for the wrong one at the wrong time
And you found a pretty girl to 
To rock your world
And send you froggy t-shirts
That makes you laugh and happier
Than you’ve been for awhile
So how could I wish for you?

To break up a working relationship
Could I do that for my own gain?
No, my yearn is for your happiness
And I will settle for texts from you
About your amazing dates and vague
Responses about your day

And I will have to contend with the fact
That I will never be your number one call
I won’t be the person to console you when you cry
Over your Omi’s death
Or be the one you lay thinking about
When you should be sleeping
The person you wish into your bed

:)

We went to breakfast today
And it was all I ever envisioned.
Waking up, getting ready for the purpose
Of seeing you. It was a new experience
One that I loved.
Walking over to pick you up
Slowly floating higher with every step
Your wonderous emergence
On par with Gatsby.

A new walk of uncertain steps
With a destination of Arnold.
Finally food is found.

Your influence in one of
Plentiful fruit
And peaceful dialogue
At last seated across from you
Able to marvel at your unmasked face
Take in the soft smile your lips
Play while enjoying a bagel.
Time spent with you fills me up
More than some scrambled eggs 
Ever could.

Once the tea has been sipped
And the plates have been cleared
We set off.
The clock has bested us
So you issue the challenge
Of your family’s signature power walk
Which has been said to perform a 
Costco run in 10 minutes.
The speed hides my blush and beating
Heart, which sours at the thought of 
Leaving you. But other things 
Claim your attention,
School   Job   Errands.

I am grateful for the 
Little pocket of attention
A breakfast together
Created. 

:)

A melancholy whirlpool threatened to drown me this morning
So powerful, it pulled down rain from the menacing clouds
My mental state reflected in the view outside my window
Until you called me out of my wreck
With an invitation for a cleansing walk
The sight of you in an oversized salmon raincoat
And plastic shoes lifted me up
Your smile may have been hidden, but
My heartbeat could still sense its attendance
The cloudburst and your music the backtrack
To our slow steps around the boulevard
The mystifying smell of toast 
Umbrella spins and hops in puddles
A reminder of the love around me
Somehow fifteen minutes of you
Is enough to drag me out of the roaring waves

:)

I walk to your favorite spot on campus as if your essence somehow persists in this space
Read the writing on the benches like they will gift me the key to your heart
We were here mere moments ago
It was raining then
I did not tell you how I wanted to abandon caution and umbrellas to spin around in the downpour
And finish off this dance with a kiss
On your lips
Life with you is so precious, I savor the few graces I receive
And spend the rest of my days wishing you knew, I want to give you the romance you deserve, sunbeam
I did not tell you then
So I write it down now
You have expanded my heart, silly star,
To care not about the love, the attention I crave, the void I always want filled
Now I am preoccupied with thoughts
Of how to add flame to your brightness, support your smile and soul
I see you, and want to be the deliverer of love worthy of you
The wind here spurs me forward, is this some sign, soft salamander?
I write these words here, in the hopes that the next time you visit this place 
My essence will be present for you

:)

I am letting go of any possibility of us.
I did not believe you when you first said that you needed to sort your life out,
That you were not in a place to start a relationship yet.
When are we ever ready for romance? Is there ever a right, perfect time?
But this month has shown me you are not capable of giving to another,
At least not right now.
My love has been overflowing in waves of sweet honey
But you are blind to the taste, unabsorbing
Your body pluses off nervous energy, unrelenting
Seeking out the nearest person to unload upon
You are not able to see past the self-built mountain of your suffering
To see the sunrise, or the other sitting right in front of you.
I love you, and so I will sit and support and commiserate
But I will not wait
For an answer that may never come, a right time always out of reach
Because I am worth more that
And I will continue being your best friend
As my dreams of us float away on butterfly wings
And I will sit upon that hill and watch the sunset
Until the whole world is inky black
And I will pick up my weary body and walk on
Until I find another companiable wonderer awaiting a new sunrise

:)

A marshmallow 
waddling through 
pristine white.
A cry bursts 
from the silence
as the bundle rolls 
face first 
into the slush.
Parents rush forward.
They need not worry, though,
For there are angels laughing
In the snow.

:)

Can I just blow away
In the whistling wind
Waving through the trees
And rustling leaves
Like ripples in the water.
It seems so forceful
Like all my troubles,
Heartbreak,
Grades,
And anxieties
Could just be swept away.
But what would be left of me?
If I allowed a powerful gust
To whip away all the uncertainties
What would it leave behind?
Do I know the parts of myself
Outside worry and depression?
If I blow away in the wind,
What would be left in my wake?

:)

I can honestly say 
you’re the person
I’ve been most honest with
my whole life.
I have never felt need
to build up walls
between you and I.
That is why
this feels so real.

You see
I come from a family
of conniving
Manipulating
Hiding facts and snooping around.
Where tears and words
are used as weapons.
If you don’t say
exactly 
what the other
wants to hear
you’re to blame.

That is why
I over analyze
look for hidden meanings
try to decipher the real truth
of what you say,
of what a look,
a simple text
means

I don’t want 
to love that way.
I battle what I’ve been taught
with kind words,
an open heart,
no underlying agenda.
I want someone
as open as I am
so please
promise to be honest
with me.

:)

There comes a shift in depression
Where you learn that you have control
The thoughts no longer attack,
They come, but you know that you hold the power.
You keep them at bay
Just enough to ensure you won’t act on them

(You should just die)
(No one would miss you)

They are not true, and that makes them less,
Yet
You hold them close enough so you can stew in the sadness
They linger because you don’t push them away
There is some safety
In sitting at the bottom
There is a kind of comfort in this darkness
You’ve learned that happiness
Only ever precedes a
Drop

Such light can never last
So if you never leave the cold hardwood floor
You never have to spiral down again
If you never let anyone in they can’t hurt you
If you never know anyone they can’t judge you
And leave
If you stay in the place, make friends with those thoughts,
Hold them close,
Then you are safe
There is no lower to go
When you’re already at the bottom. 

If you never get your hopes up
You don’t have to worry about them 
Being dashed away
Loneliness is almost bearable
Because there’s no worry of things ever getting worse
Recognized pain is better than the unknown
And you might be able to get better
But you don’t want to.

:)

Two frogs sit on a peaceful pink lily pad
Slowly floating on window clear water
Unaware of the buoyancy and surface
Tension that allows them to do so.
They stare unblinking at the bank
Seemingly thoughtless, flies buzzing by.
Except left frog’s heart beats a bit too fast
As he holds a secret tucked away.
He’s never seen a smile more delightful and pure,
Nor heard as joyful a sound as right frog’s 
soft croak laugh at a slim fish 
Who risked a splash out of the smooth glass.
Left frog’s love has surpassed friendship
And he, he shall never tell
And that has sealed his fate.

:)

Life is slowly returning to normal
But Before can never be achieved again
And we are all drowning in After

The mere thought of you rattles
Words around in me until
I can do nothing but scrawl poems 
Who barely express your essence

I am slowly bleeding out
Stanzas, articulations, restraint
To maintain the limited body of friendship
We share, but it cannot be sustained

“To be or not to be” has been posed
As the chief concern of the living
But I disagree

How to precisely profess my passion
Is the question plaguing me
As I am stuck in a labyrinth of choices

Should I take my chances and spell 
Out in my meek words


The constantness of my craving for contact
with your lips, your hips, your hair

My insatiable interest in all parts of your soul
question upon question building up inside of me

The fact that I have tucked your smile in my back pocket
and your laugh is the soundtrack to my joy

Your body has spent more time imagined next to me
than it has unfortunately in reality

Muse is the title you reserve in my poetry
as all I ever want to write is you


You are the object of all my affections
The subject of all my creations
My heart will either burst or bloom
Based on your reception of my love

:)

How is it
That I can hate you so much
Wish that I never see you again
Yet
I still think about you
The sight of a long-ago picture
Still twists my stomach.

You still inspire me
To write pages
Of love songs
About us

How you called me majestic
When I wore my hair up in a bun

Those blissful nights
Lying in the back of your minivan
The sense of adventure
From being somewhere we weren’t supposed to be
Our hearts as close
As our hands

I still have the first gift you gave me
In front of my house on my birthday
You sat through dinner with my parents
Fitting in on my side of the booth
As if you always belonged to this family
And just before the night was over
As we said goodbye next to your car
You handed me a thoughtful bundle of notes.

I returned the favor
Months later
On Valentine’s day
With a red heart
Filled with words written by those more eloquent than me
That were reminiscent of you.

No matter what I do
There are still traces of you 
all around me
Whether it’s screenshots on my phone
Or places we sat
I can’t forget you. 

:)

when switching from oboe to front ensemble didn’t scare me, but seemed exciting, despite my not knowing where any notes were on a keyboard
when performances no longer meant rattling nerves, and looking up at the screaming half time crowd framed with bright lights incited anticipation
when the drumline’s black and white checkered bows became my favorite accessory, even though it took hours and canisters of hairspray to get our buns just right
when Friday nights spent cheering over football and Saturday competitions became the highlight of my week, and Sundays spent away were lonely
when even though the new director refused to learn our names, the thought of quitting and losing my friends was worse than the degradation
when melodies and marimba runs permeated my dreams, and any moments spent with other band members could turn into vocal renditions of the show
when a freshman told me that my welcoming nature made her feel at home in band, and that she wanted to be a section leader just like me
when walking across the vast green grass on senior night I realized the people I had spent four years in marching band with had become my family. 

:)

I sit and watch the popcorn on the stove
Mindlessly waiting for a midnight snack
When all of a sudden, I’m transported
To the weekend spent riding along the waves
And looking up at a skyful of stars
And the night lit by blasts of vibrant colors
Sparks of fire explode reflected in waves
To sharp sounds of corn bouncing in the pan
I see the blazing lights illuminate
Your face and wish that the bright pops I hear
Were fireworks with you and not lonely whispers.

:)

You do not have to be good.
You do not have to walk on your knees
for a hundred miles through the desert repenting.
You only have to let the soft animal of your body
love what it loves.
Tell me about despair, yours, and I will tell you mine.
Meanwhile the world goes on.
Meanwhile the sun and the clear pebbles of the rain
are moving across the landscapes,
over the prairies and the deep trees,
the mountains and the rivers.
Meanwhile the wild geese, high in the clean blue air,
are heading home again.
Whoever you are, no matter how lonely,
the world offers itself to your imagination,
calls to you like the wild geese, harsh and exciting -
over and over announcing your place
in the family of things.

:)

A diesel freight truck
roars toward us.
A precipice is no mirage
for its metal plunge.
It is headlong nevertheless.
"It carries its own storm,"
I say dryly, feeling
my tongue wet my lips.
Trapped steel storming,
the faint line just so,
just inches
just split time,
just nothing more
than luck keeps us alive.
The mirage of metal storming
is a precipice, no mirage.

:)

amaryllis comes in many flavors
snow sometimes slants
when will politics make improvements?

strawberry amaryllis walks right in
snarling at snowfall
saying flowers don’t abuse women

female rabbi demands ancient answers
untranslatable tablets found
there’s more knowledge in flowers

aren’t all rabbis ancient females
snow’s setting in
untranslatable strawberry soufflés, first course

ancient untranslatable second course arrives
edible flowers abound
distant whale sounds sing loudly

singing memories of the future
they thought so
singing, singing, never stopping singing

echo above sea level roads
people ponder protest
extreme weather patterns manifest warnings

swim swam have swum under
and in soufflés
until willows swill scotch seltzers

no tree left behind pleas
a branch fell
right into the money jar

no money have I none
neither do you
so together we’ll be bereft

piles of words mound high
counting moon phases
feathers flew across our minds

consult the feather field guide
mostly about toucans
and birthdays and cookie monsters

we live in the country
they wonder why
the thin place is nearby

it’s a wordy country here
full of vegetables
each word is a pea

lots of potatoes with eyes
carrots without tops
one frozen leek left behind

carrots have eyes too, y’know
you can sit
on a mushroom, never ginger

some folks sit on rocks
large, smooth, flat
and shakers made fine furniture

some rocks start to shake
like a quaker
I’ve never dated a dentist

dating a dentist really bites
tooth-growing oysters
what a very weird universe

s is a yellow letter
in my synesthesia
I mean my synesthesia scheme

can you hear sunrays?
see trumpet calls?
taste the shape of words?

if you spell synesthesia with
an a (synaesthesia) everything
changes because a is red

synesthetes come in many colors
snow sometimes slants
when will untranslatable make improvements?

if you stick with me
what everything does
will be the backwards opposite

improvements make untranslatable demand flowers
hear, see, taste
everything will make sense again

you’ve got another thing coming
I see people
nothing will ever make sense

nonsense to making sense again
the mysterious mind
memories within time plus space

do you know the future
will be there?
time might go backwards, sir

if only pleasure were limitless
beyond the mind
a tiny speck of sand

if only you knew how
limitless pleasures can
be like little engine dresses

yes the small pleasures roar
like mighty engines
here sometimes they are jets

you mean nuclear jet engines
like the speedway’s
oh save us and the trees

more trees will save us
air moves through
we hear maple sap drop

trees taught us to breathe
sap rises up
we see windy voices say

nothing is really real tonight
the wind laughs
oysters jump on our plates

:)

Blue light ringing through
the green grass.

The bent heads of petals

are not praying
to anything or to anyone.

Only we are
standing in a field of them,

my son and me and me
holding him.

In my arms he stretches
out to the very far ends of the earth

like a radio signal

made of skin and organs,
of everything.

I was singing a song to him
I made up

about me dying.
Since yesterday he has not been

crying as much as screaming
like it is terrifying

to wake up.

It is terrifying to wake up
and terrifying to sleep

and his feet going blue in the cold
spring air

in which he is growing.
His mother is growing him

with the milk she makes all day,
spilling out in blue.

The song I am singing to him
puts him to sleep,

will put me to sleep.

Will one day burst the drum
in my ear

like a bell, very much like a voice
screaming from far off,

though you don’t know
if it’s hurting or hungry or nothing at all.

:)

Olive seashells
in the air

you can eat.
The very inner of the inner ear

in the breeze.
Last night my son dreamt

about falling
out of trees.

I had almost forgotten
that we were

simians.

The fiddlehead turns
on itself but only ever in love.

Green cinnamon roll,
a snake too small to hunt

anyone.
Curled in like my son’s
fingers, his fists.

More beautiful than
a spider fern,

spun-in island,
moldy tongue of a hippopotamus,

the eye of the forest.

When my son wakes up
screaming

I don’t pick him up
right away.

I tell him where he is and who
I am.

At night all the fiddlehead
wants to do is sleep.

When I sleep
I dream about death adders curling

around his soft
body,

all of us making the same kinds of sounds.

:)

I saw another ladybug
Chicago could win
if  I eat the leftover fish & chips
in every line so I don’t forget
We went to the river called fish & chips
We stayed at the fish & chips tower
They donated a million dollars to the fish & chips foundation
so we could go to school for free
It’s called fish & chips college for women

:)

The Sangre de Cristo Mountains mottled as if with oil stains. Configurations of cloud-shadows.

Easy gait of hours: a way through — or into — the dry winds.

Our church is the mountains, says the guide to the tour group, all of whom have been instructed to keep their cameras inside their bags.  A group crowding the aisles of San Geronimo Chapel.

On the dirt path between adobe structures, bareheaded. Stretching, palms out, as steam from the boiling pot does.

To move along the earth without keeping a ledger.

The horsefly not so incongruous with the sagebrush. Still, reflexive swatting.

We’re good citizens, we serve in the Army, though we’re regarded as second  class by the US government.

Framed badges and news stories in the house of the retired sheriff. Men in his family who have been policemen, firemen, soldiers. His wife pinching the ears of bear sculptures formed from mica clay.

Thick paste of red soil and the piñon that pierces through it.

To carry on from day to day without exercising the sloppy hand of  manipulation.

Four dollars for a plate of fry bread in cinnamon butter. The boy at the counter restless, wanting to get back to the electronic dance  music on pause on his iPhone.

Reading a history backward, the deep strata.

Settling on this life as a parasite on its host.

That man next door who you bought from? He sells jewelry made by an Anglo woman. His wife.

The stray dog asleep on her side, dreams ripped from her open jaw.

Money touched from hand to hand.

Whole lifetimes spent trying to make sense of an appetite.

A town called Tres Orejas. Three ears. Plenty.

:)

One look at the lilac, one smell
and my childhood is — 

dogs scratching at the sliding
glass door, bits

of bottles coming up

like grass in the grass, a dirty towel
down by the feet

of the tree, Lysol cans, small
packets of Land O’Frost

turkey meat — 
there in front of me in spring,

in the wonderfully fat rain,

flowering purple and whatever
the pinkish purple is called

and the white

ones too. They smell like
my siblings, like the backs of my infant

son’s ears, like my son
whom I would kill someone for.

Before he was born I wouldn’t kill
anyone. But now I would.

And after I’d get a coffee
from Starbucks, a coffee and a piece

of that amazing lemon-frosted
lemon cake

and think nothing of it,

and read the paper and hold him
against my chest

and listen to his body living,
alive outside

his mother’s body, and the lilac
outside on the street, outside

everyone, and heavy in the rain.

:)

don’t talk to stranglers
when yr wasted do
talk to swingers don’t
talk to swindlers if
you can tell them apart
from the strangers who
are just strangers no
stranger than you alone
and afraid to be alone
cuz they might want
to touch your throat

:)

let’s say you want flowers
you should have flowers

let’s say you want forever
you should have flowers

let’s say he should have
you in and out by tuesday

and if you want flowers
you should have flowers

and the flowers will stay
fresh until tuesday you say

yes that’s the way it’s done
should you want flowers

:)

Adam ate an apple
it got stuck in his throat
and they called him Eve
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength
and fortitude
and sadness
Adam ate an apple
choked on it so hard
a rib popped out of his chest
and they called it Eve
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength and fortitude
and sadness
it takes the hacking of a body
to make a woman
Adam hacking up a piece of his body
it was just a piece of fruit
they called me fruit once too
they called me fruity
before they called me flaming
before they called me faggot
before they called me woman
i thought i would have
to hack this body into pieces
woman, a name stuck in my throat
right under the apple Adam tried to eat
choked on it for years
waited for my ribs to pop out
my chest to explode
for my Eve to be created
from the fruit i couldn’t swallow
they called me fruit once
until they called me woman
and then they just called me fruitless
as if it took a womb to be
progenitor
creator
mother of all things
strength and fortitude and sadness
they reckon God looked
at the image of herself
and called it Adam
they still don’t call me woman
they still don’t birth me Eve
even though they cast me out
my throat shrunken close
with the fruit still stuck in it
like Adam
before they called him Eve
and suddenly i am a stranger
to Eden
i am a stranger to this body
as if it hadn’t always been mine
i reckon God looked
at the image of herself
and called it me
but i don’t know if that
was before or after the apple
before or after Adam choked
which came first
the progenitor or the mother
the apple or the rib
the strength or the sadness
this body was God’s original creation
but they called it sin
they called it Adam
I reckon God looked
at the image of  herself
and called Adam Eve
after she choked on his name
some fruit that bloomed
in everyone else’s throat
but she could never quite swallow
the fall of man was an apple
hacked up from a fruitless body
a woman learning what evil was
like a man forcing his name upon you
the fall of man was a rib
being torn from a chest
and men calling that violence holy
naming a woman based only
on the body parts she’s made of
the fall of man
was the beginning of Eve
Eve casting out Adam’s name
Eve discovering who she was
the progenitor
the creator of all things
the mother of strength
and fortitude
and sadness
the fall of man
was Eve becoming a woman
with or without Eden’s approval
and now
every time someone
tries to call her Adam
tries to force the apple
of his name down her throat
she laughs
she swallows
she looks at God herself
and she smiles

:)

If you open up any atlas
and take a look at a map of the world,
almost every single one of them
slices the Pacific Ocean in half.
To the human eye,
every map centers all the land masses on Earth
creating the illusion
that water can handle the butchering
and be pushed to the edges
of the world.
As if the Pacific Ocean isn’t the largest body
living today, beating the loudest heart,
the reason why land has a pulse in the first place.

The audacity one must have to create a visual so
violent as to assume that no one comes
from water so no one will care
what you do with it
and yet,
people came from land,
are still coming from land,
and look what was done to them.

When people ask me where I’m from,
they don’t believe me when I say water.
So instead, I tell them that home is a machete
and that I belong to places
that don’t belong to themselves anymore,
broken and butchered places that have made me
a hyphen of a woman:
a Samoan-American that carries the weight of both
colonizer and colonized,
both blade and blood.

California                          stolen.
Samoa                                        sliced in half                                          stolen.
California, nestled on the western coast of the most powerful
country on this planet.
Samoa, an island so microscopic on a map, it’s no wonder
people doubt its existence.
California, a state of emergency away from having the drought
rid it of all its water.
Samoa, a state of emergency away from becoming a saltwater cemetery
if the sea level doesn’t stop rising.
When people ask me where I’m from,
what they want is to hear me speak of land,
what they want is to know where I go once I leave here,
the privilege that comes with assuming that home
is just a destination, and not the panic.
Not the constant migration that the panic gives birth to.
What is it like? To know that home is something
that’s waiting for you to return to it?
What does it mean to belong to something that isn’t sinking?
What does it mean to belong to what is causing the flood?

So many of us come from water
but when you come from water
no one believes you.
Colonization keeps laughing.
Global warming is grinning
at all your grief.
How you mourn the loss of a home
that isn’t even gone yet.
That no one believes you’re from.

How everyone is beginning
to hear more about your island
but only in the context of
vacations and honeymoons,
football and military life,
exotic women exotic fruit exotic beaches
but never asks about the rest of its body.
The water.
The islands breathing in it.
The reason why they’re sinking.
No one visualizes islands in the Pacific
as actually being there.
You explain and explain and clarify
and correct their incorrect pronunciation
and explain

until they remember just how vast your ocean is,
how microscopic your islands look in it,
how easy it is to miss when looking
on a map of the world.

Excuses people make
for why they didn’t see it
before.

:)

As the dead, so I come
to the city I am of.
Am without.

To watch play out around me
as theater — 

audience as the dead are audience

to the life that is not mine.
Is as not
as never.

Turning down Shiraz’s streets
it turns out to be such

a faraway thing.

A without which
I have learned to be.

From bed, I hear a man in the alley
selling something, no longer by mule and holler
but by bullhorn and jalopy.

How to say what he is selling — 

it is no thing
this language thought worth naming.
No thing I have used before.

It is his
life I don’t see daily.
Not theater. Not play.

Though I remain only audience.

It is a thing he must sell daily
and every day he peddles

this thing: a without which

I cannot name.

Without which is my life.

:)

Even if I still had the clothes I wore,
those first twelve years, even if I had
the clothes I would take off before my mother
climbed the stairs toward me: the glassy
Orlon sweater; the cotton dress,
under its smocking my breasts-to-be
accordion-folded under the skin of my chest;
even if I had all the sashes,
even if I had all the cotton
underwear, like a secret friend,
I think I could not get back to how
it felt. I study the stability
of the spirit — was it almost I who came back
out of each punishment,
back to a self which had been waiting, for me,
in the cooled-off pile of my clothes? As for the
condition of being beaten, what
was it like: going into a barn, the animals
not in stalls, but biting, and shitting, and
parts of them on fire? And when my body came out
the other side, and I checked myself,
10 fingers, 10 toes,
and I checked whatever I had where we were
supposed to have a soul, I hardly dared
to know what I knew,
that though I had been taken down,
again, hammer and tongs, valley
and range, down to the ground of my being
and under that ground, it was possible
that in my essence, at the center of my essence, in some
tiny chamber my mother could not
enter — or did not enter — I had not been changed.

:)

When my wife was breaking apart, my son was falling in love.

She lay on the couch with a heated sack of rice on her belly,
sometimes dozing, sometimes staring out the window at the olive tree

as it broke into tiny white blossoms, as it swelled into bitter black fruit.

At first, I wanted to spare him.
I wished he was still farming up north, tucking bulbs of green onions
into their beds and watering the lettuce,
his hands gritty, his head haloed in a straw hat.

But as the months deepened, I grew selfish.

I wanted him here with his new love.
When I passed the open bathroom door, I wanted
to see them brushing their teeth,

one perched on the toilet lid, one on the side of the tub,
laughing and talking through their foamy mouths,
toothbrushes rattling against their teeth.

Like sage gives its scent when you crush it. Like stone
is hard. They were happy and I could touch it.

:)

When you finally, after deep illness, lay
the length of your body on mine, isn’t it
like the strata of the earth, the pressure
of time on sand, mud, bits of shell, all
the years, uncountable wakings, sleepings,
sleepless nights, fights, ordinary mornings
talking about nothing, and the brief
fiery plummets, and the unselfconscious
silences of animals grazing, the moving
water, wind, ice that carries the minutes, leaves
behind minerals that bind the sediment into rock.
How to bear the weight, with every
flake of bone pressed in. Then, how to bear when
the weight is gone, the way a woman
whose neck has been coiled with brass
can no longer hold it up alone. Oh love,
it is balm, but also a seal. It binds us tight
as the fur of a rabbit to the rabbit.
When you strip it, grasping the edge
of the sliced skin, pulling the glossy membranes
apart, the body is warm and limp. If you could,
you’d climb inside that wet, slick skin
and carry it on your back. This is not
neat and white and lacy like a wedding,
not the bright effervescence of champagne
spilling over the throat of the bottle. This visceral
bloody union that is love, but
beyond love. Beyond charm and delight
the way you to yourself are past charm and delight.
This is the shucked meat of love, the alleys and broken
glass of love, the petals torn off the branches of love,
the dizzy hoarse cry, the stubborn hunger.

:)

Why not a crocus from this bulb? Why not the purple
of bees’ lust so that, in honey, she might taste something
good? Under skin, purple is a private taste, closer
to the blood of her tongue, closer to the blood
she chokes on when she’s gasping, to the clot
behind her blackened eye. The heated force
that slammed her shin, that pushed bone
from the bone, that arched her but did not
approach caress, is another kind of lust. Spring:
a madness of grappling. Isn’t that what she sees outside
every window? And inside? Nothing unique going on.

:)

Why not a crocus from this bulb? Why not the purple
of bees’ lust so that, in honey, she might taste something
good? Under skin, purple is a private taste, closer
to the blood of her tongue, closer to the blood
she chokes on when she’s gasping, to the clot
behind her blackened eye. The heated force
that slammed her shin, that pushed bone
from the bone, that arched her but did not
approach caress, is another kind of lust. Spring:
a madness of grappling. Isn’t that what she sees outside
every window? And inside? Nothing unique going on.

:)

The parents whose boy went off to school
that morning — the police may have found someone
who saw their son, alive, after
they saw him for the last time. Step away!
Someone who saw that elfin face
change, at the word “soda.” Step back!
And change again, and change. And down
the basement steps, down into the earth,
the stairs down into the underworld.
Don’t go there. Close your eyes. Someone
may know the unbearable — someone
in custody. O, “custody.”
A wall of dirt, a wall of stone,
a bare bulb, like the uterus upside
down. No Kaddish, no washing of the dead,
no linen shroud, no company
through the long night.
Whatever honor can be kept for him — 
his pure and whole honor is kept
by his parents, for the rest of the hard
labor of their lives. All this time,
they could not die, so they’d be here, in case
he came back. Unspeakable. And now,
the one taken in for questioning cries out,
“I don’t know why, I don’t know why.”
He will not tell. Is he holding that hour
to himself. Did he hold that child in his hands,
39 years ago.
Vanished. The spirit mattered away.
And the dear matter — don’t. The bag,
the truck. The landfill or the barge, the burial
at sea — the dispersal, the containment within
the bounds of the oceans, crested on top and
cragged at the floor where the innards of the planet pour
up, molten, through fissures — contained
in the air bound by the atmosphere, the
clouds of mourning pressing against
the inner surface of the casing. Shut
your mouth. Put down your pen. Drop
your weapon! Stop! In the name of the law
and the prophets. At his birth, the history of the earth began.

:)

Of course I chose the terry cloth surrogate. Milkless
artifice. False idol. Everyone, I’m told, has a mother,

but Master bred me in a laboratory, his colony
of orphans. Rhesus macaque. Macaca mulatta. Old
World monkeys, my matriarchs ruled the grasslands

and forests long before white men like him weaned
their whiteness and maleness from our chromosomes,

slashed and burned our home, what they once called
The Orient. French Indochina. Việt Nam. Master,
like a good despot, besotted and dumbstruck, dying

to discern the genesis of allegiance, the science of love
and loss, nature versus nurture, segregated me at birth

from my maker, pelt sopping with placental blood.
In a chamber where he kept track of me, his pupils
recorded my every movement, my every utterance,

hoping I might evince to them a part of themselves.
But I wasn’t stupid. I knew famine and emaciation,

and nevertheless I picked that lifeless piece of shit
because it was soft to hold. Who wouldn’t want that?
Though it couldn’t hold me, I clung to the yellow-face

devil as though it was my true mother and I grasped
the function of motherhood: witness to my suffering,

companion in hell. Unlike infants with wire mothers
I didn’t hurl myself on the floor in terror or tantrum,
rocking back and forth, colder than a corpse. I had

what Master believed to be a psychological base
of operations. Emotional attachment. Autonomy.

Everything he denied and did to me, his ceaseless
cruelty concealed as inquisition, unthinkable until
it was thought, I endured by keeping for myself

the wisdom he yearned to discover and take credit
for. Love, like me, is a beast no master can maim,

no dungeon can discipline. Love is at once master
and dungeon. So don’t underestimate me. Simple-
minded and subservient as I might appear to be,

I gathered more about Master than he did
about me, which, I guess, is a kind of fidelity

conceived not from fondness but fear magnified
by fascination. Master made me his terry cloth
surrogate, his red-clawed god, nursing his id

on my tits, and for that, I pitied him. All this time
he was the animal. All this time he belonged to me.

:)

it’s the being alone, i think, the emails but not voices. dominicans be funny, the way we love to touch — every greeting a cheek kiss, a shoulder clap, a loud.

it gots to be my period, the bloating, the insurance commercial where the husband comes home after being deployed, the last of the gouda gone, the rejection letter, the acceptance letter, the empty inbox.

a dream, these days. to work at home is a privilege, i remind myself.

spend the whole fucking day flirting with screens. window, tv, computer, phone: eyes & eyes & eyes. the keys clicking, the ding of the  microwave, the broadway soundtrack i share wine with in the evenings.

these are the answers, you feel me? & the impetus. the why. of when the manicurist holds my hand, making my nails a lilliputian abstract,

i close my fingers around hers, disrupting the polish, too tight i know then, too tight to hold a stranger, but she squeezes back & doesn’t let go & so finally i can.


:)

Some things no one says aloud.
But he was there if he says he was.

Bleaching fields and buttermilk.
The stench of breweries and lye.

Two-thirds of his life before this one? Sky.

His current city rises off a river not Lek,
though here in the gallery, a train ride away:

The impossible familiar. The somehow known.

The curator has written:
On the crowded ferry, cows attempt to drink.

But anyone can see that one scratches her neck,
a good-sailor cow, sickle-hocked, not parched.

Cows like that. Yes. He remembers.

Also that, downriver, float the fishmongers’ baskets
of haddock and crab.

On the way home, this will be also his view,
the river running toward its source, a reverse birthing.

But now, he sees that Rembrandt has wired coils of light
into the shipbuilder’s ruff.

He remembers shipbuilders, the horizon
upon which sailed their fluyts, and above which: homesick.

That was what we call a long time ago
because it has to be called something.

And now? The guard warns him back from one world.

Rose hip. Willow. Sea salt.       The infinite clouds.

:)

I said cake

I said top hat

I said microphone

four little golden baby heads

wait I said pirate ghost

wait wait I said closed eye smiling cat

he scrawled back oh my god

I thought fuck yeah I can read this at the marathon

he said Eileen smiles

ehhh I can use it

the bell of my computer rang

same message

wait the cat is crying with relief

the cat is a devil now

the cat is not mad

the cat making racialized jazz

uh or not my white hands

I’m talking to everyone now.

and I’m using a filter. No I’m not

I acknowledge that there is an
image of me twice. I only recently

learned the term jazz hands

if we fucked Pennsylvania up what is our

hope to live in a stolen country that was always stolen

and worked largely by stolen people. Out of a conservative

diaspora came I mongrel poet from Massachusetts

to make my mark


love & these things and opportunities

to speak. We can’t fall down we teem in the new opportunity
we discover what resistance means

our time & blowing up the inside of my computer

buck studies

the phone says delivered

what is.

Adam says did you see my beard.

We talk about money awhile

I ride my bike. Get off the phone goes
ding. It’s his beard calling. I go oh.

you have what I want.

he says lol

then skull

then rocket

then turkey

green pistol

and a flame. I

don’t know what to say back to that

I say bike and go.

:)

When we arrive at the lounge of everything
with our bags
handfuls of earth     the lives of our grandparents
in our memory devices
we expect an exchange of sorts     that is what
we expect
and I think everyone deep down expects
that we will not turn back
Through a high window we will connect stars
like line drawings
translate the sparkles of the poet
we will
sign the fascinating mouth of the speaker
we will sing
lyrics that someone thought were pretty good
we will sing them
and we will not turn back     we will not

When our footsteps awaken fresh
from a long
complicated journey during which the planet
slid otherwise
we will likely remember a dream we had once
and tell
a version of it to the next person and the next
and realize hopefully
they also have a dream to tell and we will not
do that thing
where we won’t listen to anyone else’s dream
we will listen
and interpret     signing     singing     saying
even though
we have been instructed not to use ings
we will use
the wisdom disseminated by our devices
we will not turn back

we will not
If on arrival there is wringing of hands
we will shake hands
and in the eye of a storm we will make tea
with our brilliant
fading bodies we will do a variety of things
while we can
we will bed down on the steps of the assembly
if we have to
we will bed down in a court of law
and all beds
anyway are temporary and when we see
that
and realize we have traveled through the night
we have traveled
and are not turning back     that
will be the point
at which we will arrive

:)

I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow.
I feel my fate in what I cannot fear.
I learn by going where I have to go.

We think by feeling. What is there to know?
I hear my being dance from ear to ear.
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow.

Of those so close beside me, which are you?
God bless the Ground!   I shall walk softly there,
And learn by going where I have to go.

Light takes the Tree; but who can tell us how?
The lowly worm climbs up a winding stair;
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow.

Great Nature has another thing to do
To you and me; so take the lively air,
And, lovely, learn by going where to go.

This shaking keeps me steady. I should know.
What falls away is always. And is near.
I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow.
I learn by going where I have to go.

:)

How many dawns, chill from his rippling rest
The seagull’s wings shall dip and pivot him,
Shedding white rings of tumult, building high
Over the chained bay waters Liberty—

Then, with inviolate curve, forsake our eyes
As apparitional as sails that cross
Some page of figures to be filed away;
—Till elevators drop us from our day ...

I think of cinemas, panoramic sleights
With multitudes bent toward some flashing scene
Never disclosed, but hastened to again,
Foretold to other eyes on the same screen;

And Thee, across the harbor, silver paced
As though the sun took step of thee yet left
Some motion ever unspent in thy stride,—
Implicitly thy freedom staying thee!

Out of some subway scuttle, cell or loft
A bedlamite speeds to thy parapets,
Tilting there momently, shrill shirt ballooning,
A jest falls from the speechless caravan.

Down Wall, from girder into street noon leaks,
A rip-tooth of the sky’s acetylene;
All afternoon the cloud flown derricks turn ...
Thy cables breathe the North Atlantic still.

And obscure as that heaven of the Jews,
Thy guerdon ... Accolade thou dost bestow
Of anonymity time cannot raise:
Vibrant reprieve and pardon thou dost show.

O harp and altar, of the fury fused,
(How could mere toil align thy choiring strings!)
Terrific threshold of the prophet’s pledge,
Prayer of pariah, and the lover’s cry,

Again the traffic lights that skim thy swift
Unfractioned idiom, immaculate sigh of stars,
Beading thy path—condense eternity:
And we have seen night lifted in thine arms.

Under thy shadow by the piers I waited
Only in darkness is thy shadow clear.
The City’s fiery parcels all undone,
Already snow submerges an iron year ...

O Sleepless as the river under thee,
Vaulting the sea, the prairies’ dreaming sod,
Unto us lowliest sometime sweep, descend
And of the curveship lend a myth to God.

:)

My heart does carry out order is under
My brain, a stout controller, powerful
Had planned a complex project earlier
Sending order to do as potential;
To circulate blood through artery net
Stimulating every tissue active,
To survive the life through exact effort
And to run up to the course is complete;
Since then my heart started doing the task
Pumping via trillions of miles and miles
Of way, narrow, marrow, all chaotic
To defend the life breaking all the piles;
But, life forever will leave my heart, brain
In motionless, finally derailed train.

:)

When you love nature, its lover you are
Now you do love its things, features, creatures
Birds' songs, blooming flower, running river
Noisy folks, working and normal dwellers;
Harming ignorant, ever helping friend
Thundering cloud, tumultuous crowds' knotting
Far and close; left, right, up, down, forth and hind
You see, hear, feel and smell you are taking;
In summer, winter, in damn and desert
In green and fertile, in grey and barren
On plain, soft land; hard stone and turbulent
Miseries, affluence around you seen,
Simple man of nature in pain and joy
Ever known member with helping envoy.

:)

Whether things will go normal
Or will happen the occult
But always happens universal
Dirt and dust will simply out,

After day long wind and rain
From fields and farmhouse hay
Then, the night will fall when
Disappears gloomy, weary day;

Myriads stars are in milky way
Some looking at me will hark
My past, my present, anyway
And thus, I will stand in the dark;

Some stars will fall on the ground
And flowers will wither all around.

:)

Power of ill powers appearing holds
All sources of ultimate corruptions
Including crimes, forgery, cruelty
Wrong doings, hypocrisy, anarchy
Treachery, dictatory, more and more
Which go on forever and forever,
Finally curses, destructions come down
To damn, to damn, to damn and to dire damn.

:)

Now Science Is Blessed With Lots Of Devises
Which More Clearly Demonstrate And Express
God's Oneness And Ownership Of The Universe
But A Section Of Science And Scientists Oppose,

To Them No God, No Humanity, Only Humans
Not In Spirituality But In A Materialistic Position
Like Ferocious Animals Hunt, Spend And Pass
They Will Come And Go In Ever Striving Situation;

But Spirituality Surrounds Many Of God Lovers
Who Love Human Qualities Those Are Positive,
Many Of Them Deeply Think Of God And Others
And Discard All That Have Powers Of Negative,

So A Contrast Has Originated to Cause Ever Clash
As A Lot Of Mankind Are Without Thought And Blush.

:)

In each year season changes one after another
Change its color, beauty, smell and ceremony
I pass on and on and more quickly forever;

I pass through winter, summer, cold, hot, rainy
In autumn I see how nature takes a movement!
In spring I see how nature becomes so funny!

In each season nature and its inhabitants get
New arrangement of being, doing and feeling
They usually gain something new and lose old;

Sometimes they praise highly of me well calling
Sometimes sadly they lament and too scold me
I hear them all but usually I have to do nothing;

Day after day and year after year I am only me
Things and beings will go out I have only to see.

:)

That you're in this age of science so fool
Anyway can not understand real,
Your being in such the dangerous wrong
Are chiefly the causes of our much pang,
Please (it is request) , you walk the right way
More we have nothing to request and say.

:)

Nature teaches humans what are great
And urges to be properly great in mind
High like mountain and sky like vast
Deep like ocean and flat like soil and mud;

To circle around the animal planet like air
To provide necessary elements to animal,
To stretch hands everywhere like water
Without which surviving is impossible;

Nature has been made great consequently
Doing ever fruitful, useful, helpful and nice;
Doing all things and beings room exactly
No want of any element in need and use;

Without nature humans can never survive
Should take natural teachings and archive.

:)

How true that words reveal the heart content,
For from the lips a person does impart
His thoughts, his being, his hidden intent,
All these come from the things stored in the heart.

He so declared that he denies there's God,
Disdains all others who have found true faith.
Presents the many woes in life he had,
That he 'prays' to a Being he negates.

Such contradiction gives us evidence,
Of one whose soul is lost, gripped in Darkness.
No light in there, just the Spirit's absence-
And that explains the claws of Emptiness.

The blind can't discourse on what he can't see.
His vain words would sound like those from a fool.
So vague are his views, understandably
His fate in the end will be.... just dreadful.

:)

My reasons for writing are so many
Writing's second skin, like breathing to me.
Thoughts and ideas, life lessons I learned,
Woven in words and rhyme, joy fully earned.
I write not to destroy but to create,
To inspire and uplift some in their faith.
Bring light, perhaps wisdom, and comfort there,
Touch some with a thought that they'll remember.
Writing is God's gift, to Him I'll answer
Grateful each day He made me a writer!

:)

The root cause of Terror is simply Hate,
The lust to control the world with Power.
Denial of this fact will not negate
Its existence, its evident goal there.
Tendrils of this movement we know now reach
Seats of power and might in government.
Truth is so blurred as they dictate and preach
Their beliefs as peaceful, not violent.
Yet by actions any faith is made true
Their beliefs are proven.... by what they do.

:)

You shine in the day and even at night
You light up the world, wherever you roam
You shine in all places, so very bright
Your always on the run, never at home

Why can't you see what you have done to me
You done the unthinkable, left me scarred
I can't explain the pain, just let me be
Leave me alone, even when life gets hard

I struggle through the pain, only for you
To get your attention, is tough enough
You never imagine the things I do
Only for you, but you just make it rough

You don't have a clue, the things that i do
Because i would do anything for you

:)

Mighty miracles created from wraith-
All it takes is just a little faith;
I have the same, and so very much more-
What then, may I, one fine day, have in store?
I know not with surety, but this much:
Amongst my most ardent desires, as such,
There is an Angel, with which I wish consort-
I pray same-thusly, to Him, I'd exhort:
'I have asked naught of Thee, yet I ask now-
Grant me this one wish, I need not ask how
Or why You'd proffer this Angel to me,
Only that You help this Angel, to see
The Truth in her own heart, and that in mine:
A Truth our hearts may no longer confine!

:)

Iambic Pentameter, Shakespeare’s domain
Writing his fabulous verse in
His verse as delicious as Chinese Lo Mein
Both which I love to immerse in

I never quite knew about metrical feet
Five of which make a pentameter
Iambic’s a word that could make me retreat
Back to my naive parameter

Shakespeare’s deft employment
Of his pent-a-metered guile
Offers much enjoyment
In iam-bi-calic style

:)

There's a golden time of honey and rain
A flicker glimpsed on a rare occasion
When you have lightening behind your eyelids
Because your mind is too bright for you to sleep
So a haze of candlelight fills your room
And you watch the autumn pass by outside
Feel the warmth from your soft off-white blanket
While the constellations beckon you near
Have you forgotten what it's like to love
In October that feeling stops right here
Now you are awake when no one else is.

:)

There’s nothing dandier than threadbare threads
worn by a discerning shabby dresser.
A collar’s fret or subtle fray is not lesser
because it’s worn away but models instead

the bespoke tailoring of time itself.
Done poorly—the gentleman farmer’s
piecemeal pastoral, that NoHo charmer’s
duct-taped boots—it’s like an unread bookshelf

of secondhand prose: a too-studied pose.
Done well, it draws you in to draw you near,
reveals the intricate pattern in the years’
inexorable ravel. Between decompose

and deconstruct, what seemed a foppish quirk
grows wise. Design undone. We wear time’s work.

:)

I, being born a woman and distressed
By all the needs and notions of my kind,
Am urged by your propinquity to find
Your person fair, and feel a certain zest
To bear your body’s weight upon my breast:
So subtly is the fume of life designed,
To clarify the pulse and cloud the mind,
And leave me once again undone, possessed.
Think not for this, however, the poor treason
Of my stout blood against my staggering brain,
I shall remember you with love, or season
My scorn with pity,—let me make it plain:
I find this frenzy insufficient reason
For conversation when we meet again.

:)

Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare.
Let all who prate of Beauty hold their peace,
And lay them prone upon the earth and cease
To ponder on themselves, the while they stare
At nothing, intricately drawn nowhere
In shapes of shifting lineage; let geese
Gabble and hiss, but heroes seek release
From dusty bondage into luminous air.
O blinding hour, O holy, terrible day,
When first the shaft into his vision shone
Of light anatomized! Euclid alone
Has looked on Beauty bare. Fortunate they
Who, though once only and then but far away,
Have heard her massive sandal set on stone.

:)

I shall go back again to the bleak shore
And build a little shanty on the sand,
In such a way that the extremest band
Of brittle seaweed will escape my door
But by a yard or two; and nevermore
Shall I return to take you by the hand;
I shall be gone to what I understand,
And happier than I ever was before.
The love that stood a moment in your eyes,
The words that lay a moment on your tongue,
Are one with all that in a moment dies,
A little under-said and over-sung.
But I shall find the sullen rocks and skies
Unchanged from what they were when I was young.

:)

Loving you less than life, a little less
Than bitter-sweet upon a broken wall
Or brush-wood smoke in autumn, I confess
I cannot swear I love you not at all.
For there is that about you in this light—
A yellow darkness, sinister of rain—
Which sturdily recalls my stubborn sight
To dwell on you, and dwell on you again.
And I am made aware of many a week
I shall consume, remembering in what way
Your brown hair grows about your brow and cheek
And what divine absurdities you say:
Till all the world, and I, and surely you,
Will know I love you, whether or not I do.

:)

Oh, oh, you will be sorry for that word!
Give back my book and take my kiss instead.
Was it my enemy or my friend I heard,
“What a big book for such a little head!”
Come, I will show you now my newest hat,
And you may watch me purse my mouth and prink!
Oh, I shall love you still, and all of that.
I never again shall tell you what I think.
I shall be sweet and crafty, soft and sly;
You will not catch me reading any more:
I shall be called a wife to pattern by;
And some day when you knock and push the door,
Some sane day, not too bright and not too stormy,
I shall be gone, and you may whistle for me.

:)

Pity me not because the light of day
At close of day no longer walks the sky;
Pity me not for beauties passed away
From field and thicket as the year goes by;
Pity me not the waning of the moon,
Nor that the ebbing tide goes out to sea,
Nor that a man’s desire is hushed so soon,
And you no longer look with love on me.
This have I known always: Love is no more
Than the wide blossom which the wind assails,
Than the great tide that treads the shifting shore,
Strewing fresh wreckage gathered in the gales:
Pity me that the heart is slow to learn
What the swift mind beholds at every turn.

:)

When you, that at this moment are to me
Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
And be no more the warder of my heart,
Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
And be no more—what now you seem to be—
The sun, from which all excellences start
In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;
I shall remember only of this hour—
And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—
The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.

:)

Since you would claim the sources of my thought
Recall the meshes whence it sprang unlimed,
The reedy traps which other hands have timed
To close upon it. Conjure up the hot
Blaze that it cleared so cleanly, or the snow
Devised to strike it down. It will be free.
Whatever nets draw in to prison me
At length your eyes must turn to watch it go.

My mouth, perhaps, may learn one thing too well,
My body hear no echo save its own,
Yet will the desperate mind, maddened and proud,
Seek out the storm, escape the bitter spell
That we obey, strain to the wind, be thrown
Straight to its freedom in the thunderous cloud.

:)

When you, that at this moment are to me
Dearer than words on paper, shall depart,
And be no more the warder of my heart,
Whereof again myself shall hold the key;
And be no more—what now you seem to be—
The sun, from which all excellences start
In a round nimbus, nor a broken dart
Of moonlight, even, splintered on the sea;
I shall remember only of this hour—
And weep somewhat, as now you see me weep—
The pathos of your love, that, like a flower,
Fearful of death yet amorous of sleep,
Droops for a moment and beholds, dismayed,
The wind whereon its petals shall be laid.

:)

Still will I harvest beauty where it grows:
In coloured fungus and the spotted fog
Surprised on foods forgotten; in ditch and bog
Filmed brilliant with irregular rainbows
Of rust and oil, where half a city throws
Its empty tins; and in some spongy log
Whence headlong leaps the oozy emerald frog. . . .
And a black pupil in the green scum shows.
Her the inhabiter of divers places
Surmising at all doors, I push them all.
Oh, you that fearful of a creaking hinge
Turn back forevermore with craven faces,
I tell you Beauty bears an ultra fringe
Unguessed of you upon her gossamer shawl!

:)

having studied swarthmore charts and mirrors,
fashion magazines, foucault, bloom, bad light,
whereof—hereof—had not become clearer;
what vision to present as first self-sight.

self quit; put on boots and a see-through dress,
some thought it was ironic "self-object-
ification", said they were not impressed.
some guessed that "honesty" was self's subject,

were put off nonetheless, self-asked: to sleep
with me? who would? self flat, self one inch deep,
self-glimpsed not much in that giant mirror:
innocence -credulity, self doth protest!

hey! presumptuous interlocutor!
pissed off, thwarted, played, and soon, undressed!

:)

I’m queer for nouns or verbs that end in -ickle,
For bouncy trampolines, for trust and bluff.
We’re told by those downtown that La Morbid’s dull
Renouncing didn’t rustle up enough
Bling to dazzle more than a few of them.
Turn on a dime, a channel. Those we flip
Ring truer than the frilly stratagem
Fern bars used to unfurl, and we know zip
About karate or brass knucks. To battle
The meltdown blues, lay out your Cups and Swords.
Don’t doubt the Duke will hop down from the saddle,
His belt slung low. Check out the storyboards:
Next year he trades his roan for a motorcycle.

:)

what a saint you are, shining on everything,
drawn to the world like flames are to moths,
like honey to bees. So readily do you dole
yourself out, and in such abundance so that
we might operate our otherwise redundant eyes.
For they’d be useless even as shiny bibelots
that studded the otherwise dull surfaces of faces.

No, in your absence, in that total darkness
the eyes wouldn’t see or even be seen. And they
would soon shrivel up and desiccate, die out
from pointlessness like the little toe will
(unless we can find a way to reverse its long
decline). Hey, plump eyes! Isn’t it time you put
your tiny wet hands together for the light!

:)

Probably twilight makes blackness dangerous
Darkness. Probably all my encounters
Are existential jambalaya. Which is to say,
A nigga can survive. Something happened
In Sanford, something happened in Ferguson
And Brooklyn & Charleston, something happened
In Chicago & Cleveland & Baltimore & happens
Almost everywhere in this country every day.
Probably someone is prey in all of our encounters.
You won’t admit it. The names alive are like the names
In graves. Probably twilight makes blackness
Darkness. And a gate. Probably the dark blue skin
Of a black man matches the dark blue skin
Of his son the way one twilight matches another.

:)

Inside me is a black-eyed animal
Bracing in a small stall. As if a bird
Could grow without breaking its shell.
As if the clatter of a thousand black
Birds whipping in a storm could be held
In a shell. Inside me is a huge black
Bull balled small enough to fit inside
The bead of a nipple ring. I mean to leave
A record of my raptures. I was raised
By a beautiful man. I loved his grasp of time.
My mother shaped my grasp of space.
Would you rather spend the rest of eternity
With your wild wings bewildering a cage or
With your four good feet stuck in a plot of dirt?

:)

Because you’re gone, I take a book to bed:
The Flame of Passion. Scabbard at his thigh,
Lord Henry gets the girl. You’d only buy
top Booklist picks. “The romance genre’s dead,”
you’d say when promises of I-thee-wed
lured me to bargain bins. I learned to lie
about my day, hoard Harlequins on the sly
while you were off at work, your office spread
with red-inked proofs. But now it makes me yawn
to read beyond the lovers’ wedding night.
I close The Flame, not even halfway through.
His sword grows dull while she goes on and on
about how lovers must stay true. I’d write
another ending, if I could, for you.

:)

When he got to the farmhouse, he rifled through
the cabinets, drawers, and cupboards,
and his buddies did too. The place was abandoned,
or so he thought, and his buddies did too.

He tried to talk to people in town, and his buddies did too,
but he was the only one whose Yiddish made it
across into German. They took his meaning.
He, in the farmhouse, took a camera and a gun,

but his buddies, who knows. About the gun,
it’s also hard to say, but after the war he took up
photography, why not, and shot beautiful women
for years. Got pretty good at it, and how.

Won prizes and engraved plates, put them in a drawer, forgot
the war, forgot his buddies, forgot the women, forgot the drawer.

:)

To push and push with raw pink claws like
hands of shin. To tunnel my love through wet
earth, wet stars — no one needs the underneath
like me. I give you permission to
grip me. To patrol the worm-drench of
my thinking. To bite a worm’s head and cure
the rest as cache. Your flesh, my flesh, your dead
as dead, buried like a feeling. To push through
that wet, a scrum of worms whittling
my skin like a premonition. To have pushed
mountains into hills, ragged sooth from the
slid wall of healing. “Nothing,”
said the suicide, “is as sad as recovery.”
To work myself forward like a noun or an entry.

:)

I was reading Jeffrey Goldberg’s new piece
In The Atlantic — it was the one about
President Obama’s decision not
To be persuaded by a commonplace
That our credibility hinges on the use
Of swift and massive lethal force despite
Pressure even from his own Cabinet
Appalled that Assad shelled Ghouta with sarin gas — 
When I thought of your poem on the way
Of denial, “Via Negativa,” whose lines
Celebrated their (your rhyme) reticence.
Why am I even talking this way to you?
I watched you being buried, yet in the end
I wonder if I had ever been your friend.

:)

I’d have you known! It puzzles me forever
To hear, day in, day out, the words men use,
But never a single word about you, never.
Strange!—in your every gesture, worlds of news.
On busses people talk. On curbs I hear them;
In parks I listen, barbershop and bar.
In banks they murmur, and I sidle near them;
But none allude to you there. None so far.

I read books too, and turn the pages, spying:
You must be there, one beautiful as you!
But never, not by name. No planes are flying
Your name in lacy trailers past the blue
Marquees of heaven. No trumpets cry your fame.

Strange!—how no constellations spell your name!

:)

Castaways, we hit the forest — our camping stove
turned low, I gripped my tent close for its trial
in virgin attitudes of stiffness while
lamps fluttered on the dark. My roof sank wave
on wave accordion-like, the only sin
we knew; and soon the Jameson appeared.
I’d burned one back and by the third
she laid her hand on mine, like a napkin ...

Later, I caught those tiny gasps from Joan
and Michael’s tent where he slipped into her
like (this I thought) a frog à la Bashō;
those dark rippling walls where she kept center,
held her breath, so I had to puzzle how
one could leave and neither be alone.

:)

Between the train's long slide and the sun
ricocheting off the sea, anyone
would have fallen silent in those words,
the language of age in her face, the birds
cawing over the broken earth, gathering near its stones
and chapel doors. In the marina, the sea and its bones
have grown smaller. Though the tide is out,
it is not the tide nor the feathers nor the cat
that jumps into the street, the dust
lifting with each wing and disappearing. The rust-
colored sheets that wrap the sails of ships,
I don't know their name nor the way to say lips
of water in Italian and mean this:  an old woman
stood by the tracks until his hand stopped waving.

:)

Getting the child to bed is awful work,
Committing that rage to sleep that will not sleep.
The lie rots in my throat saying, “O.K.
There is balm in Gilead. Go to bed.
Honey of generation has betrayed us both.”
And truly it is no wild surmise of darkness
Nor Pisgah purview of Canaan drowned in blood
But only my child saying its say in bed.

If madness ever covers me, the caul contract
That now but loosely insinuates a shroud
I shall go howling into the conscious grave
(God keep children from the power of the dog)
Follow that note into the uttering horn
Awake in the womb from which I was born.

:)

about a broken bowl,
now two half-bowls,

still ready to hold
what they can, even

if that’s nothing

What’s not to love
about weeds and weeds

and weeds that crowd
the yard, and thrive

amazingly on the same
nothing

What’s not to love
about a virus crowding

the blood, putting a doll
of itself in each cell

and sailing it away
to find fortune

in the heart
What’s not to love

about the dying heart
with its four dark rooms

full of grass and broken
china, a sheeted piano

about to play
What’s not to love

about a sonata played
by a lonely child

who would rather do
anything else,

sleep in a garden
or pull up the flowers,

who would rather be sick
What’s not to love

about reading aloud
to someone fast asleep,

about not stopping,
not even when

a bowl slides from the bed
and crashes

like a bell in water

:)

To see clearly,
not needing a drink
or pill or puff
of any pipe
to know I’m alive.
To come home,
peel off sandals
and step onto
the cool tile floor
needing only
the rush of water
over strawberries
I picked myself
and then a knife
to trim the dusty
green heads
from each one,
to watch them
gleam cleanly
in a colander
in a patch of sun
near the sink.

:)

In Florence, early, a stooped man moves down the alleys
Waiting for the rinds to be set out for the pigeons,
And, at dawn, swallows wheel from the eaves and campaniles
Crying out a call of pain peculiar to this city.
One thinks of the plague that moled through these cellars
Six centuries ago, and of the beggars that begot these beggars
Rolling off their women to shuffle past the merchants’ doors.
Though a sculptor, here and there, may have succeeded
At converting their bald pain into a kind of sorrow,
It lives still, an heirloom of back rooms and old piazzas,
And is first cousin to a suffering I used to think
Belonged to the Midwest alone, where I grew up,
Observing its essential rules: that men edge off
Just when their help is needed most, and that
A person, almost always, will starve before abandon
The land and circumstances of his birth. But more,
I saw that in Florence, too, a woman in a dusty dress
Will sometimes lean against a door she’s leaned against
A thousand times, watching her child chase balking chickens,
And with her darkened teeth will smile
The selfsame smile that I have seen and wondered at
Among the plywood shacks of Kankakee or Peotone.

:)

No longer satisfied by the way time slips
through his life’s work, the maker
of hourglasses yearns for a change.

He elects to construct a staircase instead.
Rather than grains of sand,
he’ll manufacture one stair after another
to lament every transient second.

Look at it now! It rockets upward, almost vertical,
beginning in his backyard, puncturing
the cloud cover, and everyone speculates
where it will end. It will end
where all ambitions end: in the ether,
where the body ceases, and a story continues.

But for now, it’s a monument.
For now: a defiance, misoneism.
A bridge between
Earth and what Earth cannot touch.

What does he think as he builds?
Mostly he contemplates the work:
the sawdust, the anger, the hammer.
But sometimes he dreams of cars, highways,
of crashes and sequestered wreckage.
Old pain. He had a friend, out there.
There was a highway, a vehicle overturned.

If his friend was here today,
she’d understand this monument.
She liked the sky, country music and caterpillars.

There are four thousand muscles in a caterpillar.
It uses every one of them
to become something other than itself.
Is the body a cocoon? the man wonders.

From the top of the staircase, the life
he left below is almost unrecognizable.
Look at the beagle, yelping in the neighbor’s yard.
The rooftops of the shrinking houses. Everything
getting smaller as his view of the world

expands. The roads marked by petite yellow lines.
Graceland and Grant’s Tomb and whatever’s left
of the Parthenon. All of it is down there.
Things end. But what he can’t comprehend
is how, around those endings, everything else
continues.

:)

The day folds up like money
if you’re lucky. Mostly

sun a cold coin
drumming into the blue

of a guitar case. Close
up & head home.

Half-hundred times I wanted
to hock these six strings

or hack, if I could, my axe
into firewood. That blaze

never lasts.
I’ve begged myself hoarse

sung streetcorner
& subway over a train’s blast

through stale air & trash.
You’ve seen me, brushed past—

my strings screech
& light up like a third rail—

Mornings, I am fed by flies,
strangers, sunrise.

:)

Hey, diddle, diddle, the cow
jumped down, the whole kit and
caboodle, and you the moon.
Driving north from town, Galway City,
Whit Sunday, Auntie May at the wheel,
you didn’t know what to feel,
the windshield black and cracked,
the little tuft of fur caught
in the wiper. Poor dumb beast,
Auntie May slammed on the brakes.
The bovine slid from the bonnet to ditch,
switched her tail into the air
to signal the end of danger.

Your whole life seat-belted and strapped,
you never set out without the tire check,
map, extra blanket, jack and flares.
You never pulled all-nighters,
but thumb grasped to pinkie, be prepared,
read ahead to a fault, Descartes
breaking apart before the sun
came out to shine on Plato’s cave.
And here, you knew a moment before
she flew, the Tom rosining his bow,
the dish and the spoon calling ahead
for reservations. But if there’s
anything to say it’s this:

Sometimes the cat may break
a string, or the dog sink into
a deep depression, but not to relax
and shout for Guinness all around.
At most, pull over and share candy
from May’s pocketbook, brown and worn,
tell jokes of the Kerryman measuring
the miles to Dublin by the number of
pedestrians knocked down. For up a bit,
in another bucolic scene, on either side
of a winding road cut between two cliffs,
a herd of Holsteins grazes on the green
grass, bobbing their heads toward the sea.

:)

Right before dawn, in the blue light of it,
I look for the horses but they aren’t there.
Only the winter trees, thick along the creek.
Everything is still, not even birds move. Only
a pain in my chest under my right breast.
Pulling muscle, something engorged, I’m afraid
of its motion, the turn I awaken to daily.
The horses must be beyond the creek, feeding
in the frozen meadow. I’ll not wait for them.

My knowledge is only human, only my eyes see
what is to be seen, and beyond that is more
yet it is not within my ken. I can’t see death
yet know its presence well, even its posture
prior to it. Pain is not death, I allow that.
For that I am grateful to my mind, the memory
ancient, not lonely or unreasonable. Pray then
for the blue light of morning that draws me
toward the day. Pray then for the horses,
for the presence of all things, for the pain.

:)

Love is apart from all things.
Desire and excitement are nothing beside it.
It is not the body that finds love.
What leads us there is the body.
What is not love provokes it.
What is not love quenches it.
Love lays hold of everything we know.
The passions which are called love
also change everything to a newness
at first. Passion is clearly the path
but does not bring us to love.
It opens the castle of our spirit
so that we might find the love which is
a mystery hidden there.
Love is one of many great fires.
Passion is a fire made of many woods,
each of which gives off its special odor
so we can know the many kinds
that are not love. Passion is the paper
and twigs that kindle the flames
but cannot sustain them. Desire perishes
because it tries to be love.
Love is eaten away by appetite.
Love does not last, but it is different
from the passions that do not last.
Love lasts by not lasting.
Isaiah said each man walks in his own fire
for his sins. Love allows us to walk
in the sweet music of our particular heart.

:)

Someone to follow him? I don’t think so.
It is like proposing a second heaven
as if it were attainable because you played
with angels in your childhood and believed
in the wings of their flesh.

A young girl strokes the tight braids
of her hair and thinks she is one memory.
A little eye gleams in the moonlight
hoping to be freed of its love of water, of
foggy nights, of wings, tangled
in the hair of celestial heads.
I would die again for that girl
who received everything the world suggested
as if each moment were an ascension.

But I have used up my deaths in loving him
as he died. And if this new love ends
it will have to go on in me
like a mountain behind a town
when the mountain is made to watch that town
enter flames and smoke
until it at last resembles the essence of love,
that impersonation of his heart’s heart
which, one day in the girl’s second memory,
became a little eye in moonlight
where he lived in her, imperishable
as anything offered to coexist
with the unreplaceable.

:)

It waits. While I am walking through the pine trees
along the river, it is waiting. It has waited a long time.
In southern France, in Belgium, and even Alabama.
Now it waits in New England while I say grace over
almost everything: for a possum dead on someone’s lawn,
the sing light on a levee while Northampton sleeps,
and because the lanes between houses in Greek hamlets
are exactly the width of a donkey loaded on each side
with barley. Loneliness is the mother’s milk of America.
The heart is a foreign country whose language none
of us is good at. Winter lingers on in the woods,
but already it looks discarded as the birds return
and sing carelessly; as though there never was the power
or size of December. For nine years in me it has waited.
My life is pleasant, as usual. My body is a blessing
and my spirit clear. But the waiting does not let up.

:)

On the West Coast, days of rainstorm wrestle
the Coast Range, their wet fury driven landward.
We never quite known what the sky promises,
and there is certain assurance in that fate.
It is for that we wait. We’ve already weathered
more than promises. They’ve passed us by.
So I’m not sure this morning when I step outside,
and suddenly it’s not winter anymore but some
warm mask that molds the contours of my face
with unbidden warmth. It’s almost unnatural
but I hope not, having already found reliable
the promise of loss. My expectation is unfulfilled.

Somewhere within the universe of the prairie hills
is a climate that is yet unnoticed, and from it
is welling a warm rupture of another sure season.
Believe it is not unusual, I urge myself
whose myths are always changing in the light.
So it’s this we arrive into daily, always
another season, warm or frigid, and it’s we
who wage weather within our furious spirits.

Tomorrow’s dawn is a promise that will fulfill.
Never mind if the sky does not quite agree.

:)

If an inaudible whistle
blown between our lips
can send him home to us,
then silence is perhaps
the sound of spiders breathing
and roots mining the earth;
it may be asparagus heaving,
headfirst, into the light
and the long brown sound
of cracked cups, when it happens.
We would like to ask the dog
if there is a continuous whir
because the child in the house
keeps growing, if the snake
really stretches full length
without a click and the sun
breaks through clouds without
a decibel of effort,
whether in autumn, when the trees
dry up their wells, there isn’t a shudder
too high for us to hear.

What is it like up there
above the shut-off level
of our simple ears?
For us there was no birth cry,
the newborn bird is suddenly here,
the egg broken, the nest alive,
and we heard nothing when the world changed.

:)

When they sold off the farm she took the child
and caught a bus out of town—as for him,
with everyone gone and everything grim,
he opened a pint of bourbon, piled

pictures, letters and clothes in the yard,
doused them with kerosene, struck a match
and watched as they burnt to ashes, watched
and worked on his whiskey, working hard.

The next morning he caught an outbound freight
heading god-knows-where and he didn’t care—
he was down to nothing, a gypsy’s fare—
down to a rusty tin cup and a plate,

dice and a bible, a bedroll and fate,
down to a bone-jarring ride on a train
through country dying and desperate for rain,
running nowhere to nowhere and running late.

:)

On the West Coast, days of rainstorm wrestle
the Coast Range, their wet fury driven landward.
We never quite known what the sky promises,
and there is certain assurance in that fate.
It is for that we wait. We’ve already weathered
more than promises. They’ve passed us by.
So I’m not sure this morning when I step outside,
and suddenly it’s not winter anymore but some
warm mask that molds the contours of my face
with unbidden warmth. It’s almost unnatural
but I hope not, having already found reliable
the promise of loss. My expectation is unfulfilled.

Somewhere within the universe of the prairie hills
is a climate that is yet unnoticed, and from it
is welling a warm rupture of another sure season.
Believe it is not unusual, I urge myself
whose myths are always changing in the light.
So it’s this we arrive into daily, always
another season, warm or frigid, and it’s we
who wage weather within our furious spirits.

Tomorrow’s dawn is a promise that will fulfill.
Never mind if the sky does not quite agree.

:)

I think that I shall never fear
a brontosaurus that is queer,

iguanodon as fetisheer,
a mammoth bringing up the rear,
an astrodon with extra gear,

metrosexual squirrel and deer,
a breeder with a dance career,
a fruit with cauliflower ear,

a lesbianic Chanticleer,
a grinning limpish-wristed Lear,
the weird one or the mutineer,

but those who perfectly adhere,
stay clear, stay clear, stay clear, stay clear.

:)

Through the night
the apples
outside my window
one by one let go
their branches and
drop to the lawn.
I can’t see, but hear
the stem-snap, the plummet
through leaves, then
the final thump against the ground.

Sometimes two
at once, or one
right after another.
During long moments of silence
I wait
and wonder about the bruised bodies,
the terror of diving through air, and
think I’ll go tomorrow
to find the newly fallen, but they
all look alike lying there
dewsoaked, disappearing before me.

:)

I lie beneath my window listening
to the sound of apples dropping in

the yard, a syncopated code I long to know,
which continues even as I sleep, and dream I know

the meaning of what I hear, each dull
thud of unseen apple-

body, the earth
falling to earth

once and forever, over
and over.

:)

One man held the huge pig down
and the other stuck an ice pick
into the jugular, which is when
we started to pay attention.
The blood rose ten feet with force
while the sow swam on its back
as if to cut its own neck.
Its fatty back smacked the slippery
cement while the assassins shuffled
to keep their balance, and the bloody
fountain rose and fell back and rose
less and less high, until
the red plume reentered the pig
at the neck, and the belly collapsed
and the pig face went dull.

:)

I knew the pig
was the butcher’s, whose game
lived mainly behind our garage.
Sometimes turkeys, always
roosters and sheep. Once the windmill
turned two days without stopping.
The butcher would walk in his apron
straight for the victim. The others
would scratch and babble
and get in the way.
Then the butcher would lead the animal
to the back door of his shop,
stopping to kill it on a stump.
It was always evening, after closing.
The sea breeze would be rising,
cloaking the hour in brine.

:)

The pig we saw slaughtered
was more than twice anything
shut up in the patch
we trespassed to make havoc.
Since the butcher was Italian,
not Jewish, that would be his pig.
Like the barber who carried
a cigar box of bets
to the stationery store, like
the Greek who made sweets
and hid Greek illegals,
immigrant “submarines,”
the butcher had a business, his
business, by which he took
from our hands the cleaver and serrated
knife for the guts,
and gave us back in butcher paper
and outer layers of brown wrapping
our lives for their cries.

:)

Hung up to drain, the great pig,
hacked into portions,
looked like a puzzle
we could put together in the freezer
to make a picture of
a pig of course, a map, clothes or other things
when we looked.

:)

Efficient as Fate,
each eye a storm trooper,

the cleaners wipe my smile
with Comet fingers
and tear the plaster
off my suicide note.

They learn everything
from the walls’ eloquent tongues.

Now, quick as genocide,
they powder my ghost for a cinnamon jar.

They burn my posters
(India and Heaven in flames),

whitewash my voicestains,

make everything new,
clean as Death.

:)

When the landlord brings new tenants,
even Memory is a stranger.

The woman, her womb solid with the future,
instructs her husband’s eyes
to clutch insurance policies.

They ignore my love affair with the furniture,
the corner table that memorized
my crossed-out lines.

Oh, she’s beautiful,
a hard-nippled Madonna.

The landlord gives them my autopsy;
they sign the lease.

The room is beating with bottled infants,
and I’ve stopped beating.

I’m moving out holding tombstones in my hands.

:)

Meryon saw it coming (who was he?):
No people, so no noise. As it should be.
The Bridge. The Morgue. Ghostly round his bed
Antipodean atolls and tattoos had fluted,

Volcanoes puffed. Then borborygmic sea
Forked, at its last gasp, into a V:
Down that black gallery and backward slid
A syrup, foul, ovum and sperm concocted,
The foggy groan of Antichrist. 1863:
People mattered nothing, live or dead.

Paris by his impeccable etchings emptied:
Pointy turrets, windows, not a single head
Poking out—and there across the sky,
Tortuous, the skeleton birds creak by.

:)

As if all the steps had stopped
As if all the takes had token
As if all the creaks had croaken
As if all that weeps had wopped

As if all that flips had flopped
As if all that mocks had moaken
As if all that speaks had spoken
As if all that drips had dropped

As if all that hopes had hopped
As if all that leaps had lopped
As if all that aches had oaken
As if all that peaks had poken
As if all that creeps had cropped
As if all that peeps had popped

:)

Indeed I must confess,
When souls mix ’tis an happiness,
But not complete till bodies too do join,
And both our wholes into one whole combine;
But half of heaven the souls in glory taste
Till by love in heaven at last
Their bodies too are placed.

:)

In thy immortal part
Man, as well as I, thou art.
But something ’tis that differs thee and me,
And we must one even in that difference be.
I thee both as a man and woman prize,
For a perfect love implies
Love in all capacities.

:)

Can that for true love pass
When a fair woman courts her glass?
Something unlike must in love’s likeness be:
His wonder is one and variety.
For he whose soul nought but a soul can move
Does a new Narcissus prove,
And his own image love.

:)

That souls do beauty know
’Tis to the body’s help they owe;
If when they know’t they straight abuse that trust
And shut the body from’t, ’tis as unjust
As if I brought my dearest friend to see
My mistress and at th’instant he
Should steal her quite from me.

:)

I reached heaven and it was syrupy.
It was oppressively sweet.
Croaking substances stuck to my knees.
Of all substances St. Michael was stickiest.
I grabbed him and pasted him on my head.
I found God a gigantic fly paper.
I stayed out of his way.
I walked where everything smelled of burnt chocolate.
Meanwhile St. Michael was busy with his sword
hacking away at my hair.
I found Dante standing naked in a blob of honey.
Bears were licking his thighs.
I snatched St. Michael’s sword
and quartered myself in a great circular adhesive.
My torso fell upon an elastic equilibrium.
As though shot from a sling
my torso whizzed at God fly paper.
My legs sank into some unimaginable sog.
My head, though weighed with the weight of St. Michael,
did not fall.
Fine strands of multi-colored gum
suspended it there.
My spirit stopped by my snared torso.
I pulled! I yanked! Rolled it left to right!
It bruised! It softened! It could not free!
The struggle of an Eternity!
An Eternity of pulls! of yanks!
Went back to my head,
St. Michael had sucked dry my brainpan!
Skull!
My skull!
Only skull in heaven!
Went to my legs.
St. Peter was polishing his sandals with my knees!
I pounced upon him!
Pummeled his face in sugar in honey in marmalade!
Under each arm I fled with my legs!
The police of heaven were in hot pursuit!
I hid within the sop of St. Francis.
Gasping in the confectionery of his gentility
I wept, caressing my intimidated legs.

:)

They caught me.
They took my legs away.
They sentenced me in the firmament of an ass.
The prison of an Eternity!
An Eternity of labor! of hee-haws!
Burdened with the soiled raiment of saints
I schemed escape.
Lugging ampullae its daily fill
I schemed escape.
I schemed climbing impossible mountains.
I schemed under the Virgin’s whip.
I schemed to the sound of celestial joy.
I schemed to the sound of earth,
the wail of infants,
the groans of men,
the thud of coffins.
I schemed escape.
God was busy switching the spheres from hand to hand.
The time had come.
I cracked my jaws.
Broke my legs.
Sagged belly-flat on plow
on pitchfork
on scythe.
My spirit leaked from the wounds.
A whole spirit pooled.
I rose from the carcass of my torment.
I stood in the brink of heaven.
And I swear that Great Territory did quake
when I fell, free.

:)

Child of my winter, born
When the new fallen soldiers froze
In Asia’s steep ravines and fouled the snows,
When I was torn


By love I could not still,
By fear that silenced my cramped mind
To that cold war where, lost, I could not find
My peace in my will,

All those days we could keep
Your mind a landscape of new snow
Where the chilled tenant-farmer finds, below,
His fields asleep

In their smooth covering, white
As quilts to warm the resting bed
Of birth or pain, spotless as paper spread
For me to write,

And thinks: Here lies my land
Unmarked by agony, the lean foot
Of the weasel tracking, the thick trapper’s boot;
And I have planned

My chances to restrain
The torments of demented summer or
Increase the deepening harvest here before
It snows again.

:)

Late April and you are three; today
         We dug your garden in the yard.
    To curb the damage of your play,
Strange dogs at night and the moles tunneling,
    Four slender sticks of lath stand guard
         Uplifting their thin string.

    So you were the first to tramp it down.
         And after the earth was sifted close
    You brought your watering can to drown
All earth and us. But these mixed seeds are pressed
    With light loam in their steadfast rows.
         Child, we’ve done our best.

    Someone will have to weed and spread
         The young sprouts. Sprinkle them in the hour
    When shadow falls across their bed.
You should try to look at them every day
    Because when they come to full flower
         I will be away.

:)

The child between them on the street
Comes to a puddle, lifts his feet
    And hangs on their hands. They start
At the live weight and lurch together,
Recoil to swing him through the weather,
    Stiffen and pull apart.

We read of cold war soldiers that
Never gained ground, gave none, but sat
    Tight in their chill trenches.
Pain seeps up from some cavity
Through the ranked teeth in sympathy;
    The whole jaw grinds and clenches

Till something somewhere has to give.
It’s better the poor soldiers live
    In someone else’s hands
Than drop where helpless powers fall
On crops and barns, on towns where all
    Will burn. And no man stands.

For good, they sever and divide
Their won and lost land. On each side
    Prisoners are returned
Excepting a few unknown names.
The peasant plods back and reclaims
    His fields that strangers burned

And nobody seems very pleased.
It’s best. Still, what must not be seized
    Clenches the empty fist.
I tugged your hand, once, when I hated
Things less: a mere game dislocated
    The radius of your wrist.

Love’s wishbone, child, although I’ve gone
As men must and let you be drawn
    Off to appease another,
It may help that a Chinese play
Or Solomon himself might say
    I am your real mother.

:)

No one can tell you why
    the season will not wait;
         the night I told you I
must leave, you wept a fearful rate
             to stay up late.

         Now that it’s turning Fall,
    we go to take our walk
         among municipal
flowers, to steal one off its stalk,
             to try and talk.

         We huff like windy giants
    scattering with our breath
         gray-headed dandelions;
Spring is the cold wind's aftermath.
             The poet saith.

         But the asters, too, are gray,
    ghost-gray. Last night’s cold
         is sending on their way
petunias and dwarf marigold,
             hunched sick and old.

         Like nerves caught in a graph,
    the morning-glory vines
         frost has erased by half
still scrawl across their rigid twines.
             Like broken lines

         of verses I can’t make.
    In its unraveling loom
         we find a flower to take,
with some late buds that might still bloom,
             back to your room.

         Night comes and the stiff dew.
    I’m told a friend’s child cried
         because a cricket, who
had minstreled every night outside
             her window, died.

:)

Master of beauty, craftsman of the snowflake,
inimitable contriver,
endower of Earth so gorgeous & different from the boring Moon,
thank you for such as it is my gift.

I have made up a morning prayer to you
containing with precision everything that most matters.
‘According to Thy will’ the thing begins.
It took me off & on two days. It does not aim at eloquence.

You have come to my rescue again & again
in my impassable, sometimes despairing years.
You have allowed my brilliant friends to destroy themselves
and I am still here, severely damaged, but functioning.

Unknowable, as I am unknown to my guinea pigs:
how can I ‘love’ you?
I only as far as gratitude & awe
confidently & absolutely go.

I have no idea whether we live again.
It doesn’t seem likely
from either the scientific or the philosophical point of view
but certainly all things are possible to you,

and I believe as fixedly in the Resurrection-appearances to Peter & to Paul
as I believe I sit in this blue chair.
Only that may have been a special case
to establish their initiatory faith.

Whatever your end may be, accept my amazement.
May I stand until death forever at attention
for any your least instruction or enlightenment.
I even feel sure you will assist me again, Master of insight & beauty.

:)

Holy, as I suppose I dare to call you
without pretending to know anything about you
but infinite capacity everywhere & always
& in particular certain goodness to me.

Yours is the crumpling, to my sister-in-law terrifying thunder,
yours the candelabra buds sticky in Spring,
Christ’s mercy,
the gloomy wisdom of godless Freud:

yours the lost souls in ill-attended wards,
those agonized thro’ the world
It this instant of time, all evil men,
Belsen, Omaha Beach,—

incomprehensible to man your ways.
May be the Devil after all exists.
‘I don’t try to reconcile anything’ said the poet at eighty,
‘This is a damned strange world.’

Man is ruining the pleasant earth & man.
What at last, my Lord, will you allow?
Postpone till after my children's deaths your doom
if it be thy ineffable, inevitable will.

I say ‘Thy kingdom come’, it means nothing to me.
Hast Thou prepared astonishments for man?
One sudden Coming? Many so believe.
So not, without knowing anything, do I.

:)

Sole watchman of the flying stars, guard me
against my flicker of impulse lust: teach me
to see them as sisters & daughters. Sustain
my grand endeavours: husbandship & crafting.

Forsake me not when my wild hours come;
grant me sleep nightly, grace soften my dreams;
achieve in me patience till the thing be done,
a careful view of my achievement come.

Make me from time to time the gift of the shoulder.
When all hurt nerves whine shut away the whiskey.
Empty my heart toward Thee.
Let me pace without fear the common path of death.

Cross am I sometimes with my little daughter:
fill her eyes with tears. Forgive me, Lord.
Unite my various soul,
sole watchman of the wide & single stars.

:)

If I say Thy name, art Thou there? It may be so.
Thou art not absent-minded, as I am.
I am so much so I had to give up driving.
You attend, I feel, to the matters of man.

Across the ages certain blessings swarm,
horrors accumulate, the best men fail:
Socrates, Lincoln, Christ mysterious.
Who can search Thee out?

except Isaiah & Pascal, who saw.
I dare not ask that vision, though a piece of it
at last in crisis was vouchsafèd me.
I altered then for good, to become yours.

Caretaker! take care, for we run in straits.
Daily, by night, we walk naked to storm,
some threat of wholesale loss, to ruinous fear.
Gift us with long cloaks & adrenalin.

Who haunt the avenues of Angkor Wat
recalling all that prayer, that glory dispersed,
haunt me at the corner of Fifth & Hennepin.
Shield & fresh fountain! Manifester! Even mine.

:)

Holy, & holy. The damned are said to say
‘We never thought we would come into this place.’
I’m fairly clear, my Friend, there’s no such place
ordained for inappropriate & evil man.

Surely they fall dull, & forget. We too,
the more or less just, I feel fall asleep
dreamless forever while the worlds hurl out.
Rest may be your ultimate gift.

Rest or transfiguration! come & come
whenever Thou wilt. My daughter & my son
fend will without me, when my work is done
in Your opinion.

Strengthen my widow, let her dream on me
thro’ tranquil hours less & down to less.
Abrupt elsewhere her heart, I sharply hope.
I leave her in wise Hands.

:)

Under new management, Your Majesty:
Thine. I have solo’d mine since childhood, since
my father’s suicide when I was twelve
blew out my most bright candle faith, and look at me.

I served at Mass six dawns a week from five,
adoring Father Boniface & you,
memorizing the Latin he explained.
Mostly we worked alone. One or two women.

Then my poor father frantic. Confusions & afflictions
followed my days. Wives left me.
Bankrupt I closed my doors. You pierced the roof
twice & again. Finally you opened my eyes.

My double nature fused in that point of time
three weeks ago day before yesterday.
Now, brooding thro’ a history of the early Church,
I identify with everybody, even the heresiarchs.

:)

Beneath the writing on the wall
is the writing it was designed

to obscure. The two together
form a third kind

:)

There is no writing
on the wall’s other side

Perhaps this lack
constitutes a fourth kind

:)

Some of the writing on the wall
will be designed as truth

some as art

:)

It is said to represent a mirror
of everyday life in its time

:)

I cradled my newborn daughter
and felt the heartbeat
pull me out of shock.
She didn’t know
what her hands were:
she folded them. I asked her
was there a place
where there was no world.
She didn’t know
what a voice was: her lips
were the shape of a nipple.

:)

In the park the child says:
watch me. It will not count
unless you see. And she shows me
the cartwheel, the skip, the tumble,
the tricks performed at leisure in midair,
each unknown until it is finished.
At home she orders:
see me eat. I watch her
curl on herself, sleep;
as I try to leave the dark room
her dreaming voice commands me: watch.

:)

Always we passed the seesaw
on the way to the swings
but tonight I remember
the principle of the lever,
I sit the child at one end,
I sit near the center,
the fulcrum, at once she has power
to lift me off the earth
and keep me suspended
by her tiny weight, she laughing,
I stunned at the power of the formula.

:)

Cross-hatchings, palm and rain,
clapboard faded
to the grain, half-shutters
open to old vines and mangroves

draining their own shadows;
recollecting what the body knows
suspended between coral
and shifting images of cloud ...


After death,
after the knowledge
of death,
his death,


his face, unwrapped,
already yellowed,
papery, recovered
with a small white cloth


then lowered away
and shut to the earth;

So pierced,
so mute,
these words
re-opening:

Not this.

:)

The rain had gone. I swam against the current,
harnessed by water till I turned and swung
out with the tide, shouldering deep

into a rhythm of my own, long strokes
pulled under the body and returning
past the glinting crease in which I breathed,

the sea half-woken like another body
bedded into sheer transparency,
the outer reaches granular with light.

Comebacks. Chains of radiance.
Far more than meet the eye.

What do they meet then, intimate
but otherworldly, mimicking the world?


I looked back at the land’s thin edge,
pines along the shoreline near a fort

where cannons rust, mouths left open among
thistleweed around the dozing moat.

Far back among fallen needles, pigeons shuffle
through shade, their feathers iris underlight,
soft flares bob the dark.

The land had disappeared.
The sun had followed it. From either wrist,
half-mingled with my breath into the night,

a trail of ungloved phosphor travelled back.

:)

Sounds too have their surfaces:

within
the mortal frame, particles of blood
revolve as in a sort of heaven where

breath moves through us as an unseen light;
but when the marrow bonds are parted they in turn
set loose what has been called the soul ...

the spill and friction
glancing like a coin within a sea of coins;

my left hand pulls through as I breathe,
the right recovers, elbow in the air,

until the will behind the will strikes—
pike-flash in a swerving current,
predatory bird.



After death—his voice,
that constellation
shining out—

his face, his eyes—

as each had been, now
gone. Or going on,
a ghost—another way

:)

A slanting chop.
Erratic gasps
between thick chunks of water

crowded through the night.

The unclogged screw
of a propellor

ringing into fossil-drillings,

detonantions, manacles—

(the jangled
monkey-chain above his bed;

he clung with both hands
to the small trapese,
his lower body paralyzed
for months ...

not this)—


far larger than myself,
a shambling hulk,

tentacular, a pulpy
helmet, lantern eyes,
the huge mouth gorging,

undigested corpses
bulging in the belly wall.
I thrashed to break free

but the ocean held me,
and a slap of water broke
across my mouth.

:)

Troughs of recollection; hands now two numb sponges,
and a cold ache pressed into the spine.

A conscript leaning on my rifle, I stood guard for hours
staring through wire toward the Blue Waters Hotel:

an all-night crew, unreal, flourescent
polished the lobby floors; high in a yellow cell

black shadows rippled on drapes until the lights went out.
The sentry’s solitude. The muffled crump of surf

beyond the esplanade; the ocean shifting
to an onshore drowse of salt over the palm trees and camp.

A palm rat slithers through rotten fronds.
The mind floats imageless.

Then back to footage of commandos stalking a sentry
from behind—the pounce, a hand clamped hard

over the mouth, the blade thrust in, the sagging weight set down,
a clutch to save the helmet as it drops to gravel, quick

hand signals to shadows hunched behind. One night while
still on guard I crept into an empty tent and fell asleep.

The duty sergeant found me—legs stuck out beneath the flap.
He held my rifle. Prodded the bayonet at my spine,

“Keep sleeping and they’ll kill us all,” he whispered
as the bayonet found the nerve, pain jolting

to my hands and feet.His boot beside the blade
he pumped me hard against the ground then let me up,

my limbs still trembling, the uniform stuck bloody to my back.

:)

When does it begin,
submission sliding into savagery—
the reptile mind among its enemies

revenged and striking—bayonet
driven deep into the bag,

the rifle stock slammed home,
the scream in my own mouth?


A guard dog chained
against the fence.
The collar chokes it back.

:)

When I was eight our Latin master had us stand beside him
while he marked our work. The desk concealed us below

the waist and he’d reach up our shorts to run his hand
along the inside of our thighs. Shift or step away

he’d growl “Stand still!” or “Pay attention, boy!”
as if his fondling were the lesson.


Sacks-and-bags he called me; and one afternoon, my eyes
fixed on an ink stain at my feet, the wood floor rocking

like a ship—navis, navem—willing myself out of it,
out of the room, out of the body, swaying in the heat

but also silken, wondering, astray, near fainting
as the nausea heaved—I threw up on his head.

A half-digested avocado in a mess of milk. Fumbling
for his handkerchief he wiped his face, his scalp,

his glasses, “Alright Sacko never mind; can you get down
to sick bay on your own or should I send the Bishop with you?”


Walking home I stopped to watch a line of men work on the road.
They swung their pickaxes in unison, the sun caught flashing

as they poised axe heads for a moment overhead, then with
a slow arc slammed them down into the asphalt crust:

overalls stripped to the waist, cloth arms dangling
near their legs, they chanted out what may have been a long

insult against the foreman, the umlungu, lounging, shirt
unbuttoned, pale belly gleaming in the shade. The work song

hoisted, held mid-phrase, the weight of it, then driven
with a hard expulsion of breath into the ground.

:)

The will is broken,
realigned, then broken further,

burning like another
spine within the spine.

A sentry-spy,
it stalks us from behind.

The sunken path emerges
not as feeling nor as thought

but as the mind itself,
historical, embodied, and alive.

:)

Forgotten nights,

the shuck and wash of tides,
entangled shadows of the burglar guards

sent wriggling on the blanket as I stirred there
sleepless, sickened by the swirling

mind lured outward into unknown pleasures
swarming back against the fear

of punishment, of being maimed,
of others’ injuries ...


Bright red, page after page,
my father’s medical thesis,
my fingers
pressing small black corners
into which he slid the photographs,

the gloss unbuckling,
Now look away

(I was no more than five), but what I saw
each time if only for a second, stares at me:


More than naked—
cut apart or sewn;
encrusted. Swollen,
unkown organs
sectioned off
but spilling into
sight—
unframed.


Enormous.
More than any body
could be made to bear.


It was a drowning agony,
compassion sinking
into anger, shame, disgust,
resurging with each later shock

—the dead flesh
grafted on a classmate’s arm
held close against my face
until I hunched down pleading
for release;


the veteran on the bus,
half-seen, then fully seen,
a boiled mask stretched tight
and welded to the head;


the sugar-worker’s hand
crushed by the mill—a red
stump held up to the car,
blood on the lowering glass.

No other way.

As through a single
wound ripped past
all dressing—

reaching further in

:)

Our epoch takes a voluptuous satisfaction
In that perspective of the action
Which pictures us inhabiting the end
Of everything with death for only friend.

Not that we love death,
Not truly, not the fluttering breath,
The obscene shudder of the finished act—
What the doe feels when the ultimate fact
Tears at her bowels with its jaws.

Our taste is for the opulent pause
Before the end comes. If the end is certain
All of us are players at the final curtain:
All of us, silence for a time deferred,
Find time before us for one sad last word.
Victim, rebel, convert, stoic—
Every role but the heroic—
We turn our tragic faces to the stalls
To wince our moment till the curtain falls.

:)

A world ends when its metaphor has died.

An age becomes an age, all else beside,
When sensuous poets in their pride invent
Emblems for the soul’s consent
That speak the meanings men will never know
But man-imagined images can show:
It perishes when those images, though seen,
No longer mean.

:)

A world was ended when the womb
Where girl held God became the tomb
Where God lies buried in a man:
Botticelli’s image neither speaks nor can
To our kind. His star-guided stranger
Teaches no longer, by the child, the manger,
The meaning of the beckoning skies.

Sophocles, when his reverent actors rise
To play the king with bleeding eyes,
No longer shows us on the stage advance
God’s purpose in the terrible fatality of chance.

No woman living, when the girl and swan
Embrace in verses, feels upon
Her breast the awful thunder of that breast
Where God, made beast, is by the blood confessed.

Empty as conch shell by the waters cast
The metaphor still sounds but cannot tell,
And we, like parasite crabs, put on the shell
And drag it at the sea’s edge up and down.

This is the destiny we say we own.

:)

But are we sure
The age that dies upon its metaphor
Among these Roman heads, these mediaeval towers,
Is ours?—
Or ours the ending of that story?
The meanings in a man that quarry
Images from blinded eyes
And white birds and the turning skies
To make a world of were not spent with these
Abandoned presences.

The journey of our history has not ceased:
Earth turns us still toward the rising east,
The metaphor still struggles in the stone,
The allegory of the flesh and bone
Still stares into the summer grass
That is its glass,
The ignorant blood
Still knocks at silence to be understood.

Poets, deserted by the world before,
Turn round into the actual air:
Invent the age! Invent the metaphor!

:)

Child of my winter, born
When the new fallen soldiers froze
In Asia’s steep ravines and fouled the snows,
When I was torn


By love I could not still,
By fear that silenced my cramped mind
To that cold war where, lost, I could not find
My peace in my will,

All those days we could keep
Your mind a landscape of new snow
Where the chilled tenant-farmer finds, below,
His fields asleep

In their smooth covering, white
As quilts to warm the resting bed
Of birth or pain, spotless as paper spread
For me to write,

And thinks: Here lies my land
Unmarked by agony, the lean foot
Of the weasel tracking, the thick trapper’s boot;
And I have planned

My chances to restrain
The torments of demented summer or
Increase the deepening harvest here before
It snows again.